##Why EventEmitter4

The main reason why I wrote _EventEmitter4_ is that I had run into an untractable bug in my own program and that the only way to solve the problem was by dumping the internal state of the emitter class that I was using, that is, _EventEmitter2_. Dumping the internal state of _EventEmitter2_ was surprisingly hard, simply because the over-optimized code was difficult to follow, execution after execution. That is the main reason why my own bug became hard to solve. 

###Let us first debunk a common myth

The idea behind the [information hiding](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_hiding) concept is that users of a module should only know about the functions listed in the module's API. This is true, until there are bugs either in your own program or even in the external module itself.

The bugs in your own program may very well cause the module's private variables to be in a state that you did not expect. You may not be able to detect this just be looking at the internal state of your own program. You will need to have a close look at the internal state of the module. If there is no way in which the API of the module can expose its full state to you, you may be unable to solve the bug in your own program.

It is well known that debugging _EventEmitter_ issues in your own program can be seriously tricky. That is why the _EventEmitter4_ class implements a _toString()_ function that dumps a summary of its internal state.

If you use the _EventEmitter4_ class, you should know that it stores its ordinary listeners in an object in which each key is an event, and in which each entry contains an array of listener functions. The once-only listeners are stored in exactly the same way. The listeners to all events are just stored in an array. The numbers that you can see in the `toString()` internal state dump of _EventEmitter4_, are just a count of the listener functions that it contains in that particular array.

When you only just _use_ the module, you may still be able to get away without understanding how its internal state is stored and what the values are at any point in time, but when you need to extend the module, this is usually no longer true. Your own functions will probably have to manipulate that internal state too. Most users of any alternative _EventEmitter_ class will actually be extending it by inheriting it in their own classes.

Therefore, the idea that they do not need to know how the internal storage of the _EventEmitter_ class works, is not particularly true. Furthermore, from the issue lists in the alternative _EventEmitter_ projects, you can easily see that many of these users want to add more functions to the _EventEmitter_ class. Most of these feature requests are only applicable to very specific situations. There would be no point in burdening the core project with such sometimes very ideosyncratic requirements. It would be better if these users could actually do that by themselves.

###underscore.js

When using a library like [underscore.js](http://underscorejs.org), it is almost trivial to manage the internal data structure of a class like _EventEmitter4_.

Some people call a tool like _underscore.js_ a tool of functional programming. It is true that probably all of its functions are [idempotent](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Idempotence) and therefore, do not keep internal state. That part is indeed the same what functional programming languages try to achieve, but functional programming tends to be much more than that.

In my opinion, _underscore.js_ is better termed an implementation of _set algebra_. It pretty much does the same as SQL, but then just on one table in memory. The main difference between _underscore.js_ and SQL, is that _underscore.js_ does not implement functions for dealing with the [cartesian product](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cartesian_product), that is, _joining_ multiple sets.

The use of _set algebra_ often turns functions that deal with tree data structures into one-liners. Since _EventEmitter4_ only deals with trees of maximum two levels -- which is a relatively simple data structure -- the use of set algebra results in surprisingly short functions. These functions are at the same time much easier to read.

It also means that you can easily put _console.log()_ statements in the module's source code, if you ever need it. Furthermore, this also means that it is much easier for other people to help fixing bugs or offer pull requests.

###Concerning performance

Since all real work in _EventEmitter4_ is done by calling into _underscore.js_, it relegates any performance issue to that module. _EventEmitter4_ has no performance characteristics on its own.

I strongly suspect that the performance for _underscore.js_ -- up till now I have not had time or a pressing need to read its source code -- is to an important extent relegated to the performance of the implementation of _Object_ and _Array_ classes in nodejs. Since _underscore.js_ is based on the use of repeated function calls, it also counts on the Javascript engine to minimize its overhead when executing function calls.

Typical NodeJS code is replete with listeners functions and callback functions. There would be no point in trying to fix any performance issue related to that, just in _EventEmitter4_. 

The responsibility for those areas falls squarely onto the Google v8 team. If they can make further performance improvements in those areas, they would not just improve the performance of _EventEmitter4_ but of all possible modules and applications.

In other words, one reason why an alternative _EventEmitter_ implementation could be fundamentally faster than _EventEmitter4_, is that it uses faster data structures than the standard _Object_ and _Array_ classes. The _EventEmitter2_ and _EventEmitter3_ libraries definitely do not do this.

Painstakingly spelling out data manipulations manually, instead of using _set algebra_, will not necessarily make their programs any faster, but it will bloat the source code and make it more difficult to read. 

I did not go down the route of replacing set algebra functions by manually-devised code, because the performance in ultra-simple code such as _EventEmitter4_, is something that can only be improved at lower levels.

###Why not the standard nodejs EventEmitter

I really needed an `onAny()` function in my project. The standard nodejs _EventEmitter_ class does not implement it. At the same time, the internal data structure of the standard _EventEmitter_ class is not particularly documented anywhere, as far as I know. You would have to painstakingly excise it from its source code, just like I was eventually forced to do for _EventEmitter2_.

###Why not EventEmitter2

_EventEmitter2_ does have an `onAny()` function.

However, there is no way to dump the state of its emitter objects. Because it also supports wildcards, such as `on('foo.*')`, the _EventEmitter2_ source code became large and is rather difficult to figure out.

I managed to place _console.log()_ statements to check the state of the _EventEmitter2_ class, in order to detect a bug in my own program, but it was unnecessarily hard. The module is also replete with performance optimizations of which I do not believe for a second that they do anything for performance at all. These redundant optimizations still manage to further complicate the already overburdened source code of the module.

In my opinion, there is actually no reasonable justification for implementing the `on('foo.*')` functionality. You can just use `onAny()` and trivially skip the events that you do not need:

```javascript
onAny(function() {

        if(!/foo\.*/.test(emitter.event)) return;

        //remainder of your listener code

});
```

Is it really necessary to complicate the source code of the module tremendously in order to gain so little? 

###Why not EventEmitter3

_EventEmitter3_ does not have an `onAny()` function. The module is not implemented using any form of _set algebra_ either. Therefore, I did not particularly feel like extending it.

Consequently, instead of painstakingly extending any of these alternative _EventEmitter_ classes, I made the decision to roll my own.

